The tcenum Coset Enumeration Package
====================================

The tcenum package implements Todd-Coxeter coset enumeration using
the HLT with lookahead strategy [CDHW]. The package is based on programs
developed for work on my PhD thesis [Soi], and is presently composed of
a front end (written in C) for easy input of presentations which may
include Coxeter-type relations and a back end (written in Fortran)
to do the actual enumerations.

I also include presentations in tcenum format, with comments and
references, for all the sporadic simple groups and their automorphism
groups.

The current package has been developed only for Linux, and in particular
the bash shell, gcc compiler, and gfortran compiler.

The tcenum package and the source included with this distribution
are copyright (C) Leonard Soicher 1982-2024. The tcenum package
is licensed under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 3 of the
License, or (at your option) any later version. For details, see
<https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html>.  

If you use the tcenum package in a published work, then please reference
this use.

Installing tcenum
------------------

Unpack the archive file in a chosen directory, move to the tcenum
subdirectory and run `tccompile`. The format for this command is

     tccompile [ <maxmib> [ <intbytes> ] ]

where `<maxmib>` is the maximum store in MiB available for the coset
enumeration (the default is 6000) and `<intbytes>` is the size in bytes
of an entry in the coset table (must be 4 or 8, the default is 4).

After running tccompile the executables will be in the directory 
tcenum/bin, which you should add to your PATH variable.

Running tcenum
--------------

The command to run tcenum is simply `tcenum`, which on its own produces
the usage formats:

    tcenum <presentation_file>
    tcenum <presentation_file> <maxc>
    tcenum <presentation_file> <maxc> <ilooka>
    tcenum <presentation_file> <maxc> <ilooka> <result_file>
    tcenum <presentation_file> <maxc> <ilooka> <result_file> <permgens_file>

The parameter `<presentation_file>` should be a file containing the
presentation and subgroup generators for the enumeration, in the format
described in the next section.

The parameter `<maxc>` is the maximum number of cosets the enumerator
is allowed to define, subject to there being enough given memory. This
should be an integer greater than 1 or the default value 0, which means
to use all of the given memory.

The parameter `<ilooka>` is the index increment at which lookahead takes
place.  This should be a positive integer or the default value 0, which
means to look ahead at index 2 and then every time the index is double
that when the last lookahead finished.

The parameter `<result_file>` should be a file to which the result of
the enumeration is appended. The default is that this is not done.

The parameter `<permgens_file>` should be a file to which a sequence
tc_permgens (in GAP 4 format) of permutation generators from the
final coset table is output. These "permutations" will be partial if
the enumeration was not successful. The default is that permutation
generators are not output.

The presentation format for tcenum
----------------------------------

The tcenum input should be in an ASCII text file in the format described
below.

The input has five main sections which should be terminated by full
stops as follows:

    <all generators> "." <generators not known to be involutions> "."
    <subgroup generators> "." <coxeter relations> "."
    <further relations> "."

Anything written after five full stops is ignored and can be used for
comments.

Here are two presentations for Alt(5) in this form (the first enumerates
over the identity, the second over the subgroup generated by `a` and `b`):

    AB.B...B3,(AB)5.  

    abc..a,b.a5b3c.(abc)5.

Throughout, blanks, horizontal tabs, carriage returns, and newlines
are ignored, commas and semicolons are equivalent, and upper and lower
case letters are distinguished. In addition, in sections 1, 2, and 4,
commas and semicolons are ignored.

The generators must be single letters and come from the set 
{"a","b",...,"z","A","B",...,"Z"}. Generators to be used are given
in the first section, where you must give at least one generator.

The generators  x  for which you do NOT want the assumption that  1=xx
should be put in the second section.

The third section contains words for the generators of the subgroup
over which you want to enumerate. These words should be separated by
commas (or semicolons).

We give the syntax for a word (in slightly extended BNF, 
where {} means repeat zero or more times):

    <word> ::= "" | <term> <word> 
    <term> ::= "1" | <factor> <power> 
    <factor> ::= <generator> | "(" <word> ")" | <commutator> 
    <commutator> ::= "[" <word> "," word {"," <word>} "]" 
    <power> ::= "" | <unsigned integer> | "-" | "-" <unsigned integer>
    <generator> ::= "a" | "b" | ... | "z" | "A" | "B" | ... | "Z"

Multiplication is denoted by juxtaposition, a factor is inverted by
following it with "-", and a factor is raised to the n-th power when
followed by the integer n. Commutators are left normed, so that
[a,b,c,...] means [[a,b],c,...].  A term consisting of just "1" is the
empty term, and so a word consisting of just "1" is the empty word.
Additions to the above syntax are that left parenthesis "(" and left
square bracket "[" are equivalent in words, as are ")" and "]".

The fourth section contains the Coxeter relations. If you do not want
any of the implications which follow then leave this section empty.
If  a  and  b  are (different) generators, and  k  is an unsigned integer
then akb in this section denotes the relator (ab)k, i.e. the relation
1=(ab)k. If  a,b,c,d,...  are (different) generators, and  k,m,n,...
are unsigned integers then akbmcnd...  is a shorthand for  akb bmc cnd
... .  Each unordered pair of generators should be specified in this
section at most once. If the Coxeter relations section is not empty and a
pair a,b of generators is not specified in this section then the relator
(ab)2 is assumed. Specifying a0b means that no relator is entered or
assumed for the  a,b  pair. Note: no assumptions or implications about
the orders of the generators are made in this section, so the given and
implied "Coxeter relations" apply to all the generators, whether known
to be involutions or not. Here is an example presentation for the Weyl
group of E6 (to be enumerated over the Weyl group of D5):

    abcdef..a,b,c,d,f.a3b3c3d3e c3f..  

The fifth section is for relations which are not necessarily of Coxeter
type. They should be separated by commas (or semicolons), and each
should be a word by itself (a relator) or an expression of the form
`<word>1=<word>2=...=<word>k`. This is translated to be `(<word>1)-1
<word>2,...,(<word>1)-1 <word>k`, so it is usually most efficient if
`<word>1` is a shortest word amongst `<word>1,<word>2,...,<word>k`. 

Here is an example presentation for the symmetric group Sym(6), given in
[AFGR], for enumeration over its subgroup of order 5 generated by `d`:

    cd.d.d.c6d.
    d5,[c,d]3,[c,dcd]2.

Note that in this notation, the relation 1=cc is implicitly given and
the Coxeter relations section gives the relation 1=(cd)6.

Here is a presentation from [Soi] for the sporadic simple group M22,
for enumeration over a subgroup PSL2(11) generated by `a,b,c,d`:

    abcde..a,b,c,d.
    a3b5c3d a4e3c.
    (abe)3,(abc)5,(bce)5,
    (abce)8,
    (bcd)5,(acde)4.

Here is a presentation from [AFGR] for the automorphism group J3:2 of the
sporadic simple Janko group J3, for enumeration over a cyclic subgroup
of order 24 (and index 4186080):
 
    cd.d.cd.
    .
    d3,(cd)24,[c,d]9, 
    (cd(cdcd-)2)4,(cdcdcd-(cdcd(cd-)2)2)2, 
    [c,(dc)4(d-c)2d]2,[c,d(cd-)2(cd)4]2.
 
The presentations directory
---------------------------

The directory `presentations` contains presentations in tcenum format,
with comments and references, for all the sporadic simple groups and
their automorphism groups.

From the information in this directory, we see that every sporadic simple
group has a presentation with at most 48 relations. Since every (sporadic
or otherwise) simple group is 2-generated, it follows by Lemma 2.3 of
[GKKL] that every sporadic simple group has a presentation with two
generators and at most 50 relations. Such a result was said in [GKKL]
to be in preparation by me. Note that the result also holds for the Tits
simple group T, should you wish to consider T to be a sporadic simple
group, by the presentation for T (in tcenum notation):

    ab.b...b3=(ab)13=[a,b]5=[a,bab]4=((ab)4ab-1)6=1.

given in [AFGR].

References
----------

[CDHW] J.J. Cannon, L.A. Dimino, G. Havas and J.M. Watson, Implementation
and analysis of the Todd-Coxeter algorithm, *Mathematics of Computation*
**27** (1973), 463-490.

[GKKL] R.M. Guralnick, W.M. Kantor, M. Kassabov and A. Lubotzky, 
Presentations of finite simple groups: a computational approach,
*Journal of the European Mathematical Society* **13** (2011), 391–458.

[Soi] L.H. Soicher, Presentations of Some Finite Groups, PhD Thesis,
University of Cambridge, 1985. <https://doi.org/10.17863/CAM.110463>

[AFGR] R. Wilson et al., ATLAS of Finite Group Representations -
Version 3, <https://brauer.maths.qmul.ac.uk/Atlas/v3/>


-Leonard Soicher, July 2024.
